Tape-based Disk Formatter for TRS-80 Model III or 4
Version 1.4 2021-04-15

This program allows you to exercise the floppy drives on a Model III
or 4 computer without the use of a bootable DOS diskette.  The resulting
disks are not set up with a file system of any kind. It requires a
16K RAM system with disk controller and at least one drive.

The operation (format, read, write, dump), The drive number (0-3),
number of cylinders (1-96), the starting write precompensation
cylinder (0-96), number of sides (0-1), the encoding density (S or D)
representing FM or MFM format, the sector interleave (1-6), and
number of the first sector (0-1) can be selected by answering the prompts.
Press <ENTER> to accept the default values shown in [ square brackets ].

Single density formats to 10 sectors of 256 bytes per track.  Double
density formats to 18 sectors of 256 bytes per track.  Write precompensation
is enabled by default for cylinder 25 and higher in MFM mode.  Normally
this may be left at the default, but should be adjusted upwards to
perhaps 50 if you are using 80 cylinder drives.  An asterisk (*) will
appear after the side number when write precompensation is enabled
for format or write operations.

The dump track function is fairly primitive at present. It just dumps
the first 512 bytes of raw data from cylinder 0 side 0.  I plan to
add some support for viewing desired areas of the disk.

THIS PROGRAM CAN DESTROY EXISTING DATA ON THE DISKETTE SO USE CAUTION!

To load the program, start cassette BASIC by holding <BREAK> while
pressing and releasing the orange RESET button.  Select the tape speed
by responding to Cass? with <ENTER> or H for high speed (1500 baud) or
L for low speed (500 baud).

At the READY prompt, type SYSTEM and press <ENTER>.
At the *? prompt type FORMAT and press <ENTER>.

Two asterisks will appear at the upper right of the screen.  The left
asterisk will remain steady while the right asterisk will blink while
the program is loading.  If the letter 'D' or 'C' replaces the left
asterisk, the loading failed.  Try a different volume setting.

After a successful load, which takes under thirty seconds at 1500 baud,
the program will start automatically and begin prompting the user for
operation and parameters.  Then the user will be prompted to insert a
diskette in the target drive and press <ENTER> to start the operation or
<BREAK> to abort back to the READY prompt.  Likewise hitting <BREAK> at
any prompt question will return to BASIC.

While an operation is in process, the current cylinder number and side
will be displayed. The numbers are in hexadecimal.  Why?  Well, the
conversion is easier. I'll probably change that to decimal later but it's
not a big priority.

The format operation is followed automatically by a read verify operation.

If you can format, verify, and write successfully, your drives are working
well. It doesn't imply they are in alignment, however, just functional. You
can try formatting in one drive and reading in another to see if the radial
alignment is within a good range.

You can run the program again by typing SYSTEM and just responding
with "/" then <ENTER> at the *? prompt.

If you wish to modify and/or build the program from source, you can
get the zmac assembler from http://48k.ca/zmac.html and run it:

    zmac format.z80

The outputs will be in the zout/ directory.

A big shout out and thank you to George Phillips and Peter Phillips for
making the trs80gp emulator and upgrading the zmac assembler which were
instrumental in the creation of this software.  Also many thanks to the
great folks in the Tandy community who answered my questions and helped
troubleshoot various aspects of the project.

Future capabilities:
    - function to step the drive heads manually for troubleshooting
    - function to seek the heads over the full range for cleaning diskettes
    - read, examine, edit, and write sectors
    - re-interleave a track

Please feel free to write with any problems, questions, or suggestions.

Amardeep
asc135@yahoo.com
